HIGH PERFORMANCE PROGRAMMING
UPPSALA UNIVERSITY
SPRING 2022
ASSIGNMENT 3: THE GRAVITATIONAL N-BODY PROBLEM

It is recommended to do Labs 5-7 before this assignment. It is important that you
submit the assignment in time. See the deadline in Studium.

1. The N-body problem
1.1. Governing equations. Newton’s law of gravitation in two dimensions states
that the force exerted on particle i by particle j is given by
Gmi mj
Gmi mj
fij = −
rij = −
r̂ij ,
3
2
rij
rij
where G is the gravitational constant, mi and mj are the masses of the particles,
rij is the distance between the particles, and rij is the vector that gives the position
of particle i relative to particle j. r̂ij is the normalized distance vector. If ex and
ey are unit vectors in the x and y directions, respectively, then
rij = (xi − xj ) ex + (yi − yj ) ey ,
so that
2

2

2
rij
= (xi − xj ) + (yi − yj )

and
r̂ij = rij /rij .
Given a distribution of N particles, a straight-forward calculation of the force exerted on particle i by the other N − 1 particles is given by (using C-style indexing)
N
−1
X

Fi = −Gmi

j=0,j6=i

mj
2 r̂ij .
rij

Note that by using another formula for the pairwise forces, other types of particle
systems governed by Newtonian mechanics can be modeled, e.g in electrodynamics
and molecular dynamics.
There is a built-in instability in the given formulation when rij  1. To deal with
this, we introduce a slightly modified force that corresponds to so-called Plummer
spheres as follows:

Fi = −Gmi

N
−1
X

mj

j=0,j6=i

(rij + 0 )

Date: March 12, 2022.
1

3 rij .

2

HPP ASSIGNMENT 3

where 0 is a small number (we will use 10−3 ). This effectively caps the maximum
force between two particles and acts as a smoother for the simulation.
Using the symplectic Euler 1 time integration method, the velocity ui and position
xi of particle i can then be updated with
Fni
ani =
,
mi
un+1
= uni + ∆tani ,
i
xn+1
i

= xni + ∆tun+1
,
i

where ∆t is the time step size and ai is the acceleration of particle i. Note that
this straightforward solution, which we will use in this assignment, becomes computationally expensive for large values of N , since the total number of operations
required to compute the forces on all N particles at each time step grows as O(N 2 ).
There are algorithms that can be used to improve the scaling, but in this assignment we stick with the straightforward O(N 2 ) solution.
2. Problem Setting
In this assignment you will implement a code that calculates the evolution of N
particles in a gravitational simulation. You will calculate the motion of an initial
set of particles that approximates the evolution of a galaxy.
The simulation is done in two spatial dimensions, so the position of each particle
will be given by two coordinates (x and y). There will be N particles with positions
in a L×W dimensionless domain (Use L = W = 1 in your simulations). This means
that the x and y values will be between 0 and 1.
The particle masses and intitial positions and velocities of the particles will be
read from a file when the program starts, then simulated for a given number of
timesteps, and in the end the final masses, positions and velocities will be written
to a results file. (The masses will of course be the same as in the beginning, but
they will be written to the results file anyway so that it can be used as input for
another simulation later.)
Since fewer bodies have less mass with which to stick together, we want gravity to
scale inversely with the number of bodies. Set G = 100/N , 0 = 10−3 and timestep
∆t = 10−5 .
3. Files included with the assignment
Download the Assignment3.tar.gz file from Studium and unpack it. Inside it you
find four directories:
• compare_gal_files : a program that can be compiled into a separate
executable that can be used to compare different simulation results; you
can use this to check the correctness of your results.
1The symplectic Euler method is a version of the explicit Euler scheme which is the most

basic example of a partitioned Runge-Kutta method (PRK). For the standard Euler scheme, the
n
formula for xn+1
would read xn+1
= xn
i + ∆tui . The symplectic Euler scheme preserves global
i
i
properties of the gravitational system (e.g. total energy), while the standard Euler does not.

HPP ASSIGNMENT 3

3

• input_data : a set of input files that you can use when testing your program.
• ref_output_data : a set of reference output files that you can use to check
that your results are correct. The compare_gal_files program can be
used to compare your result files to the reference output files.
• graphics : a small example code showing how to use graphics routines
in the “X” window system commonly used in Linux. Being able to plot
the galaxy evolution on the screen is a nice way of seeing that the code
works, and helpful for debugging. The small test code given here is just
an example, if you know of another way of doing graphics that you prefer,
use that instead. To make the “X” graphics code work you may need
to install some additional library packages related to X development, e.g.
libX11-devel in Fedora or libx11-dev in Ubuntu.

4. Assignment
You must write a program that solves the given equations of motion for a galaxy
with the given initial conditions. Your final program should be written as efficiently
as possible.
Start by writing a code that gives correct results, then think about how it can be
optimized. Remember to use both compiler optimization flags and your own code
changes. Try to apply the optimization techniques you have learned about in the
course so far.
Input to your program: The program that you create should be called galsim
and it should accept five input arguments as follows:
./galsim N filename nsteps delta_t graphics
where the input arguments have the following meaning:
N is the number of stars/particles to simulate
filename is the filename of the file to read the initial configuration from
nsteps is the number of timesteps
delta_t is the timestep ∆t
graphics is 1 or 0 meaning graphics on/off.
If the number of input arguments is not five, the program should print a message
about the expected input arguments and then stop.
Output from your program: The program galsim should simulate the stars/particles for the given number of timesteps. If run with graphics set to 1, the
program should show the stars moving on the screen during the simulation. In the
end, the final positions and velocities of the stars should be saved to a file called
result.gal using the same binary file format as for the input file.
File format used for initial configuration (and storage of result): The
binary file format used will simply consist of a sequence of double numbers giving
the mass, position, velocity, and “brightness” of each particle. The “brightness” is
a number that is not directly used in our simulations, but that should be kept and

4

HPP ASSIGNMENT 3

stored together with each particle in the result file, so that the result file has the
same format as the input file. Both mass and “brightness” for each particle should
be the same in the result file as in the input file. The order of the numbers in the
binary file format is as follows:
particle 0 position x
particle 0 position y
particle 0 mass
particle 0 velocity x
particle 0 velocity y
particle 0 brightness
particle 1 position x
particle 1 position y
particle 1 mass
particle 1 velocity x
particle 1 velocity y
particle 1 brightness
...
So, the total file size will be N*6*sizeof(double). Note that the same format
should be used for the output file with the final result from the simulation. This
means that a result of a previous simulation can later be used as starting point for
a new simulation.
Implementation: Implement the straightforward O(N 2 ) algorithm and verify for
some small cases that your code works properly (about small test cases, see below
under “Input data”). When you are confident that your code works correctly, move
on to measure performance and consider possible optimizations.
Note that we are so far in this course only considering optimization of serial code
— in case you already know how to parallelize using threads, don’t do that here;
this assignment is about writing an efficient serial code. You will get the chance to
work with threaded programs later in the course.
Graphics is nice to have and recommended, but not mandatory. If you have difficulties making the graphics routines work on the computer you are using, it is OK
to skip the graphics. The important thing for us is performance, and not how to
use graphics routines. But it is strongly recommended use graphics if you can, it
is a nice way to illustrate what you are doing and makes it easy to see if your code
works properly for the small test cases. The graphics routines do work on the Linux
computers2 in the lab rooms, so you can at least plot things there even if you are
unable to make it work on your own computer.
Portability: You can choose freely which computer you want to use for your
performance testing in this assignment — you can use one of the university’s Linux
computers, or your own computer, or some other computer you have access to.
However, even if you have used a different computer for your performance testing,
2You can also use SSH tunneling of X11 (X-windows). This is useful if you want to open
graphical displays from the remote machine on your local computer. To achieve this, an X11 server
must be running on your local machine. The X11 connections are then tunneled and automatically
encrypted by your SSH client. Log in with ssh -X user@host or ssh -Y user@host.

HPP ASSIGNMENT 3

5

you must still ensure that the code is portable so that it can be compiled and run
on the university’s Linux computers. This is necessary to make sure that your
teachers can test your code. The code that you submit must compile and run on
fredholm.it.uu.se (or arrhenius.it.uu.se).
Report: You must write a report that motivates the efficiency of your implementation using time measurements and a description of the optimisation techniques
you have used or attempted to use. In this report, also analyse how the computational time depends on N. Remember that one of the course goals involves written
communication — the assignment reports is part of how we examine this goal and
we expect the highest level of quality. Write clearly and concisely, using figures and
tables as appropriate.
When writing your report, remember that reproducibility is important: whenever
you write a report that includes some timing measurements, or other computational
experiments of some kind, you should make sure that the report includes all information necessary so that the reported results become reproducible. The reader of
your report should be able to reproduce your results. Your report should make it
clear exactly what it is you are reporting, if you have some timings it should be
explained precisely what you were measuring: how was the measurement made, was
it for the whole program run or for some specific part of the code, what parameters
were used, how many timesteps, etc. Details about the used computer, CPU model,
compiler version, and compiler optimization options should also be included.
Note that timing results should not include calls to graphics routines. When measuring timings, run your code with graphics turned off to be sure that graphics
routines are not disturbing your timings.

5. Input data
Unpacking the Assignment3.tar.gz file gives a directory called input_data with
various input files that you can use. The smallest ones with just a few particles
are good to use to verify that your forces and timestepping are working properly.
circles_N_2.gal : two stars with equal mass moving in circles.
circles_N_4.gal : four stars with equal mass moving in circles.
sun_and_planet_N_2.gal : one heavy particle and one lighter particle orbiting the
heavy one, like a planet around a sun.
sun_and_planets_N_3.gal : sun and two planets.
sun_and_planets_N_4.gal : sun and three planets.
For the larger cases that are more interesting for performance evaluation, the input
files have the following form:
ellipse_N_01500.gal
where the number, 1500 in this case, is the number of stars N .
Those initial distributions have an elliptic shape similar to Figure 5.1, and their
evolution may lead to (for example) something like Figure 5.2.

6

HPP ASSIGNMENT 3

Figure 5.1. Example of an initial distribution of a galaxy with
2500 stars

Figure 5.2. Example of a possible distribution of a galaxy with
2500 stars after some time (this picture is for a different initial
distribution, you should not expect to get precisely this result)
5.1. Note: simulations will always be unstable for long times. The small
test cases with for example particles moving in circles, or like a sun with a few
planets, are good for verifying that the force computation and time stepping is
working properly. However, even when the computations are done correctly this
kind of simulations will become unstable when running for a long time since small

HPP ASSIGNMENT 3

7

errors (there is always some effect of rounding errors) will accumulate over time
and sooner or later this will always be seen.
So, when looking at the small simulations of a few planets etc. you should mostly
focus on the initial behavior, for example check that the particles move in circles or
orbit the sun in the expected way a few times, but if looking at it for longer times
it is not strange that the simulations “go crazy”, that is to be expected.
(Are there other more accurate and stable methods than Euler, what methods?
You don’t have to implement other methods, that is another course.)
5.2. Check your own results by comparing to reference output data. To
make it easier for you to check your own results, the Assignment3.tar.gz file
contains in the ref_output_data directory a few reference galaxy distributions in
the following files:
ellipse_N_00010_after200steps.gal
ellipse_N_00100_after200steps.gal
ellipse_N_00500_after200steps.gal
ellipse_N_01000_after200steps.gal
ellipse_N_02000_after200steps.gal
and a small program compare_gal_files.c for comparison of galaxy files.
As the filenames suggest, those files contain galaxy distributions after 200 timesteps.
So, for example, if you run your own simulation for 200 timesteps starting from
ellipse_N_01000.gal your result should be close to the reference result in
ellipse_N_01000_after200steps.gal.
The compare_gal_files.c program outputs the maximum difference between particle positions as pos_maxdiff. Since the coordinates for particle positions are
supposed to be between 0 and 1, for one timestep the errors in positions should be
small, on the level of rounding errors for the floating-point precision used. Errors
will then of course accumulate during the simulation, but since the reference output data are for relatively short simulations, only 200 timesteps, error accumulation
should not be too bad. Errors should still be within a few orders of magnitude from
the size of rounding errors.
6. Deliverables
It is important that you submit the assignment in time. See the deadline in
Studium.
You should package your code and your report into a single A3.tar.gz file that you
submit in Studium. There should be a makefile so that issuing “make” produces
the executable galsim. The source file should be named galsim.c and include all
functions. Note, all code should be included in this source file. This is important
when we do the plagiarism check using Moss - Measure of software similarity. If
we can’t do the plagiarism check the assignment will not be approved.
Unpacking your submitted file A3.tar.gz should give a directory A3 and inside
that there should be a makefile so that simply doing “make” should produce your
executable file “galsim”. The A3 directory should also contain your report, as a
file called report.pdf.

8

HPP ASSIGNMENT 3

In addition to the report, your A3 directory should also include a text file called
best_timing.txt that should contain just two lines: on the first line, just one
number giving the fastest time (in wall seconds) that you were able to achieve for
the input case ellipse_N_03000.gal with ∆t = 10−5 and 100 timesteps. On the
second line, the name of the CPU model used.
Apart from report.pdf and best_timing.txt files, your submission should only
contain the C source code file and makefile. No object files or executable files should
be included, and no input/output (.gal) or other binary files.
Part of our checking of your submissions will be done using a script that automatically unpacks your file, builds your code, and runs it for some test cases, checking
both result accuracy and performance. For this to work, it is necessary that your
submission has precisely the requested form.
To be sure that your submission has the correct form, you should check it yourself
before submitting, using the check-A3.sh script that is included with the assignment. To use the check-A3.sh script, first set execute permission for it, then copy
your A3.tar.gz file into the Assignment3 directory, and then run ./check-A3.sh
when standing in the Assignment3 directory. Make sure that you do the checking on
fredholm.it.uu.se or arrhenius.it.uu.se as we will do the checking on these
machines as well. The check-A3.sh script will then try to unpack your A3.tar.gz
file, check that it has the expected contents, and compile and run your program
trying to check that it seems correct. If the checking is successful, the output from
the script should say “Congratulations, your A3.tar.gz file seems OK!”. If you do
not get that result, look carefully at the script output to figure out what went
wrong, then fix the problem and try again.
If you have used your own computer for this assignment and then move it to the
university’s Linux computers you may find that some change is needed to make the
code portable there, e.g. adding -lm to link to the math library. Check also for
additional warnings by using the -Wall flag. Moreover, run you code through the
valgrid memory checker so you don’t have any undetected memory errors.
The report shall be in pdf format (called report.pdf) and shall contain the following sections:
• The Problem (very brief)
• The Solution (Describe the data structures, the structure of your codes,
and how the algorithms are implemented. Are there other options, and
why did you not use them?)
• Performance and discussion. Present experiments where you investigate the
performance of the algorithm and your code. Describe optimizations you
have used, or tried to use, and the measured effect of those optimization
attempts. Include a figure with a plot of measured execution time as a
function of N to confirm the expected O(N 2 ) complexity.
• References, all the references you have used for code and theory. If we find
that you have copied code or code sections without a proper reference, it
will be considered as plagiarism.

HPP ASSIGNMENT 3

9

Submission
When you are done, upload your final A3.tar.gz file in Studium. Note that the
uploaded file should have precisely that name, and that you should have checked it
using the check-A3.sh script before uploading it. Did it pass the check with
Congratulations, your A3.tar.gz file seems OK!
If not, you are not done yet and should NOT submit until it passes the check.

